Initial setup (#1)
modelpack/community: GOVERNANCE.md

# Project Governance

> The ModelPack project is dedicated to creating a universal, vendor-neutral standard for packaging, versioning, and running AI/ML projects that aligns with the OCI specification. The ModelPack is especially important for organizations who are self-hosting models (open source, or self-built) and want to be able to use the tools and processes they've proven with containers, to manage their AI/ML project lifecycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ModelPack project is dedicated to creating a universal, vendor-neutral standard for packaging, versioning, and running AI/ML projects that aligns with the OCI specification. The ModelPack project is especially important for organizations who are self-hosting models (open source, or self-built) and want to be able to use the tools and processes they've proven with containers, to manage their AI/ML project lifecycle.
```

> This is not an implementation, it is the specification on which compliant implementations can be built.

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit unclear

Author: hmm, after a second thought, let's just drop the sentence.

This governance document explains how the project is run.

- [Values](#values)
- [Maintainers](#maintainers)
- [Becoming a Maintainer](#becoming-a-maintainer)
- [Meetings](#meetings)

> - [Code of Conduct Enforcement](#code-of-conduct)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Code of Conduct](#code-of-conduct)
```

- [Modifications](#modifying-this-charter)

## Values

The ModelPack project leadership embraces the following values:

- **Openness**: Communication and decision-making happens in the open and is discoverable for future reference. As much as possible, all discussions and work take place in public forums and open repositories.

- **Fairness**: All stakeholders have the opportunity to provide feedback and submit contributions, which will be considered on their merits.

- **Community over Product or Company**: Sustaining and growing our community takes priority over shipping code or sponsors' organizational goals. Each contributor participates in the project as an individual.

- **Inclusivity**: We innovate through different perspectives and skill sets, which can only be accomplished in a welcoming and respectful environment.

- **Participation**: Responsibilities within the project are earned through participation, and there is a clear path up the contributor ladder into leadership positions.

## Maintainers

> ModelPack maintainers have write access to the [project GitHub repository](https://github.com/modelpack/model-spec). They can merge patches and are expected to review large or critical patches personally. The current maintainers can be found in [MAINTAINERS.md](./MAINTAINERS.md). Maintainers collectively manage the project's resources and contributors.

Reviewer: There is a discussion in the slack channel about how maintainers with the project should be organized. Ideally, project maintainers have access to the core repositories including:

* community
* model-spec
* modctl

Additional supplementary repositories can include a separate list of maintainers (such as for tools etc) which are not primary org maintainers

Author: Let's state it clearly as:

```suggestion
ModelPack maintainers have write access to the project repositories in [the ModelPack GitHub organization](https://github.com/modelpack/). They can merge patches and are expected to review large or critical patches personally. The current maintainers can be found in [MAINTAINERS.md](./MAINTAINERS.md). Maintainers collectively manage the project's resources and contributors. Additional supplementary repositories can include a separate list of maintainers (such as for tools etc) which are not part of the primary ModelPack project maintainers.
```

This privilege is granted with some expectation of responsibility: maintainers are people who care about the ModelSpec project and want to help it grow and improve. A maintainer is not just someone who can make changes, but someone who has demonstrated good judgement and an ability to collaborate with the team, get the most knowledgeable people to review code and docs, contribute high-quality code, and follow through to fix issues (in code or tests).

A maintainer is a contributor to the project's success and a citizen helping the project succeed.

The collective team of all Maintainers is known as the **Maintainer Council**, which is the governing body for the project.

### Becoming a Maintainer

To become a Maintainer you need to demonstrate the following:

- **Commitment to the project**:
  - Participate actively and impactfully in discussions, contributions, code and documentation reviews `this will need quantifying eventually`
  - Perform useful reviews for a significant number of non-trivial pull requests `this will need quantifying eventually`

>   - Contribute non-trivial pull requests and have them merged `this will need quantifying eventually`

Reviewer: Should we rephrase the future tasks differently?

- Ability to write quality code and/or documentation
- Ability to collaborate with the team
- Understanding of how the team works (policies, processes for testing and code review, etc)

> - Understanding of the project's code base and coding and documentation style

Reviewer: Should we also include any mention of interfacing with the CNCF?

Author: These are general ability requirements for a maintainer. It is more of a task to interface with the CNCF. So let's not be specific here.

> A new Maintainer must be proposed by an existing maintainer by opening an issue with the title "New Maintainer Proposal". A 2/3 vote of existing Maintainers approves the application. Maintainers nominations will be evaluated without prejudice to employer or demographics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new Maintainer must be proposed by an existing maintainer by opening an issue with the title "New Maintainer Proposal". A 2/3 vote of existing Maintainers must approve any application. Maintainers nominations will be evaluated without prejudice to employer or demographics.
```

Maintainers who are selected will be granted the necessary GitHub rights.

### Removing a Maintainer

Maintainers may resign at any time if they feel that they will not be able to continue fulfilling their project duties.

Maintainers may also be removed after being inactive, failing to fulfill their Maintainer responsibilities, violating the [Code of Conduct](./code-of-conduct.md), or other reasons. Inactivity is defined as a period of very low or no activity in the project for a year or more, with no definite schedule to return to full Maintainer activity.

A Maintainer may be removed at any time by a 2/3 vote of the remaining maintainers.

Depending on the reason for removal, a Maintainer may be converted to **Emeritus** status. Emeritus Maintainers will still be consulted on some project matters and can be rapidly returned to Maintainer status if their availability changes.

## Meetings

> Time zones permitting, Maintainers are expected to participate in the ModelPack office hours virtual meeting, which occurs bi-weekly on Thursday at 10:00ET.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time zones permitting, Maintainers are expected to participate in the ModelPack community meeting, which occurs bi-weekly on Thursday at 10:00ET.
```

### ModelPack Public Office Hours (bi-weekly)

**Every second Thursday @ 14:00 - 15:00**
**Time zone**: UTC
**Video call link**: [Zoom](https://zoom.us/j/99127808948?pwd=CggVIWsBPt1jUSbLaWCTcgaHpDB2tl.1)
**Meeting ID**: 991 2780 8948
**Passcode**: 644187

Maintainers may also have closed meetings in order to discuss sensitive matters or Code of Conduct violations. Such meetings should be scheduled by any Maintainer on receipt of a CoC report. All current Maintainers must be invited to such closed meetings, except for any Maintainer who is accused of a CoC violation.

## Code of Conduct

> Everything we do in the ModelPack community is governed by our [Code of Conduct](./code-of-conduct.md). Violations by community members will be discussed and resolved by the Maintainers in their private Discord channel. If a Maintainer is directly involved in the report, the Maintainers will instead designate two Maintainers to resolve the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Everything we do in the ModelPack community is governed by our [Code of Conduct](./code-of-conduct.md). Violations by community members will be discussed and resolved by the Maintainers in a private forum. If a Maintainer is directly involved in the report, the Maintainers will instead designate two Maintainers to resolve the issue.
```

Reviewer: There is no private maintainers Slack channel. Should a maintainers channel be established?

Author: sgtm.
